---
layout: post
title: Maze Generation
author: Ryan
---

<script type="text/javascript" src="/assets/js/Maze.js"></script>
<style>
	.maze {
		width: 100%;
		max-width: 601px;
	}
</style>

I've loved mazes ever since I was a child: I watched a lot of Labyrinth,
played a lot of Kula World and always wanted to be on the Crystal Maze (which I
also blame for my interest in geodesic domes). The first code I ever wrote was 
a maze game in Flash, and I still enjoy programming mazes now.

I find maze generation algorithms to be fascinating to watch, and so have included 
some JS visualisations of them here for anyone else interested. Brief descriptions 
provided but nobody will judge if you just want to watch the pretty animations! 
Clicking on each will let you watch the generation of a new random maze.

All mazes are graph based, with each cell being represented by a node and each path
an edge, cells can be connected to adjacent cells vertically or horizontally.
The graph based approach makes it easier to reuse my code for other maze 
layouts in the future (e.g., hexagons).

Anyway lets skip to the fun stuff...

## Randomised Prim's Algorithm

<canvas class="maze" id="prims" width="601" height="301"></canvas>
<script>
	createMazeViewer(document.getElementById("prims"), {
		generator : "Prims",
		color : "pink",
		mazeWidth : 30,
		mazeHeight : 15,
		cellWidth : 20
	});
</script>

For each step of Prim's algorithm we choose a random cell from all adjacent cells
to the maze (the frontier) and connect this cell to the maze in a random direction.
We repeat this until there are no more adjacent cells and the maze is complete.

Due to the way that cells are selected and added to the maze, this algorithm 
tends to create mazes with loads of short dead ends.

## Depth First Search 

<canvas class="maze" id="rb" width="601" height="301"></canvas>
<script>
	createMazeViewer(document.getElementById("rb"), {
		generator : "RecursiveBacktracker",
		color : "yellowgreen",
		mazeWidth : 30,
		mazeHeight : 15,
		cellWidth : 20
	});
</script>

The depth first search algorithm sets out from a single point in the maze and
each step chooses a random adjacent cell not yet connected to the maze, travelling
as far as it possibly can until it can go no further (i.e., all neighbours are 
already in the maze); at this point it backtracks along its path until it either 
gets to a point where it can head off in a new direction or the maze is complete.

Due to the emphasis that this algorithm puts on distance, it has the opposite 
bias to Prim's algorithm and ends up creating mazes with long winding passages.

## Wilson's Algorithm

<canvas class="maze" id="wilsons" width="601" height="301"></canvas>
<script>
	createMazeViewer(document.getElementById("wilsons"), {
		generator : "Wilsons",
		color : "orange",
		mazeWidth : 30,
		mazeHeight : 15,
		cellWidth : 20
	});
</script>

_Warning_: Wilson's algorithm can be infuriating to watch!

This algorithm starts at a point outside the maze and goes on a random walk
until it reaches the maze, at which point the path of the walk is added. If at
any point the algorithm finds that the walk has doubled back onto itself, the 
loop is removed and the walk continues.

This algorithm is incredibly slow and you may find yourself shouting at it for
going in the wrong direction. It does have the benefit of creating better mazes
though: the mazes created will be a mixture of both long winding passages, created
by the first few walks when the maze is empty; and shorter dead ends created when
the gaps are filled.
